Generative AI Fundamentals 101
Created by Adani Arisy for Mekari 2026

Table of Contents
What is Generative AI?
What Made it Possible?
Key Capabilities
Limitations
Terminology Deep Dive: Context Window, RAG, and Tools 

3
What is Generative AI?
Generative AI Fundamentals 101
 
Feature
Traditional (Discriminative) AI
Generative AI
Primary Goal
To classify or predict
To create or generate
Output
A label, a score, or a "Yes/No"
Text, images, audio, or code
Logic
Follows rules or finds boundaries
Learns patterns to replicate them
Data Needs
Smaller, structured datasets
Massive, unstructured datasets
Vibe
Analytical and precise
Creative and adaptive

What Made It Possible?
3 crucial developments that come together
Generative AI Fundamentals 101

Scaling Laws 
Capabilities emerges as compute and data grew larger
Generative AI Fundamentals 101


Next Token Prediction
Most LLMs use transformer model which predicts next token
Generative AI Fundamentals 101


Key Capabilities
Versatile Language Skill
Reasoning Step by Step
Adapting to Task With Minimal Instructions
Learning From Examples
Connecting to External Tools

Knowledge Cutoff
Potential Hallucinations
Context Window
Non-deterministic Output
Amount of information AI can process at one time.
Once the input exceed the window, AI cannot recall the information.
The freshness limit of the training data. Agent need external tools like search engine to know recent events.
AI confidently stating something that sounds plausible but actually incorrect.
Different responses even when given the same prompt. It is great for creativity but need to be careful when accuracy and consistency is critical.
Limitations

Input context is the only thing user can control to reduce hallucinations.
That’s why prompt quality is very important.
Why LLMs Hallucinate?

Vague instructions makes AI guess what you want which is prone to hallucination.
Use Tools & Verification Loop
Give multiple examples or patterns for AI to follow to strengthen model’s understanding.
Use tools to inject relevant context from trusted sources (e.g. Context7).
Use tools to verify agent output correctness (e.g., browser MCP to check resulting web page) 
Mitigating Hallucinations
Clear, Specific Instructions
Give Examples

The “working memory” of the model.
While some models boast up to millions of context window, research shows that the amount of information a model can actively "keep in mind" to perform complex logic like coding is significantly smaller.
Generative AI Fundamentals 101
Context Window

Instead of loading everything into the window, the system searches a database for only the most relevant snippets and feeds them to the model as needed.
Summarization / Compaction
Shrinks large amounts of data into a dense, high-level overview to fit more "meaning" into the same number of tokens. It prioritizes density over detail.
AI Platform Strategy vs Context Window
RAG
P.S. Copilot use RAG-style indexing & retrieval on the codebase while Serena MCP use retrieval but does not index using vector DB.

Integrate with search engine to browse the public internet and retrieve information about present events or additional data to reduce hallucinations.
Integrate with specialized data source to get information:
Context7 MCP to get latest library documentation.
Atlassian MCP to get knowledge from internal/proprietary documentation
Strategy vs Knowledge Cutoff
Search Engine Integration
MCP Integration

AI Continues to Improve

